Emissions and climate
======================

Emissions (energy)
------------------
Carbon-dioxide (CO2)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The MESSAGE model includes a detailed representation of energy-related and land-use CO2 emissions (Riahi and Roehrl, 2000 :cite:`riahi_greenhouse_2000`; Riahi, Rubin et al., 2004 :cite:`riahi_prospects_2004`; Rao and Riahi, 2006 :cite:`rao_role_2006`; Riahi et al., 2011 :cite:`riahi_rcp_2011`). Energy related CO2 mitigation options include technology and fuel shifts; efficiency improvements; and carbon capture. A number of specific mitigation technologies are modeled bottom-up in MESSAGE with a dynamic representation of costs and efficiencies. MESSAGE also includes a detailed representation of carbon capture and sequestration from both fossil fuel and biomass combustion. Land-use CO2 was previously represented using methodology documented in Riahi et al. (2007) :cite:`riahi_scenarios_2007` but is currently updated based on information from the GLOBIOM model.

Non-CO2 GHGs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
MESSAGE includes a representation of non-CO2 GHGs (CH4, N2O, HFCs, SF6, PFCs) mandated by the Kyoto Protocol (Rao and Riahi, 2006 :cite:`rao_role_2006`). Included is a representation of emissions and mitigation options from both energy related processes as well as non-energy sources like livestock, municipal solid waste disposal, manure management, fertilizer use, rice cultivation, wastewater, and crop residue burning.

Air pollution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Air pollution implications are derived with the help of the GAINS (Greenhouse gas–Air pollution INteractions and Synergies) model. GAINS allows for the development of cost-effective emission control strategies to meet environmental objectives on climate, human health and ecosystem impacts until 2030 (Amann et al., 2011). These impacts are considered in a multi-pollutant context, quantifying the contributions of sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), ammonia (NH3), non-methane volatile organic compounds (VOC), and primary emissions of particulate matter (PM), including fine and coarse PM as well as carbonaceous particles (BC, OC). As a stand-alone model, it also tracks emissions of six greenhouse gases of the Kyoto basket. The GAINS model has global coverage and holds essential information about key sources of emissions, environmental policies, and further mitigation opportunities for about 170 country-regions. The model relies on exogenous projections of energy use, industrial production, and agricultural activity for which it distinguishes all key emission sources and several hundred control measures. GAINS can develop finely resolved mid-term air pollutant emission trajectories with different levels of mitigation ambition (Cofala et al., 2007; Amann et al., 2013). The results of such scenarios are used as input to global IAM frameworks to characterize air pollution trajectories associated with various long-term energy developments (see further for example Riahi et al., 2012; Rao et al., 2013).

Climate
------------
The response of the carbon-cycle and climate to anthropogenic climate drivers is modelled with the MAGICC model (Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-gas Induced Climate Change). MAGICC is a reduced-complexity coupled global climate and carbon cycle model which calculates projections for atmospheric concentrations of GHGs and other atmospheric climate drivers like air pollutants, together with consistent projections of radiative forcing, global annual-mean surface air temperature, and ocean-heat uptake (Meinshausen et al., 2011a). MAGICC is an upwelling-diffusion, energy-balance model, which produces outputs for global- and hemispheric-mean temperature. Here, MAGICC is used in a deterministic setup (Meinshausen et al., 2011b), but also a probabilistic setup (Meinshausen et al., 2009) has been used earlier with the IIASA IAM framework (Rogelj et al., 2013a; Rogelj et al., 2013b; Rogelj et al., 2015). Climate feedbacks on the global carbon cycle are accounted for through the interactive coupling of the climate model and a range of gas-cycle models. 
