Population and GDP
====================
Population and economic developments have strong implications for the anticipated mitigation and adaptation challenges. For example, a larger, poorer population will have more difficulties to adapt to the detrimental effects of climate change (O’Neill et al., 2014 :cite:`oneill_new_2014`). The primary drivers of future energy demand in MESSAGE are projections of total population and GDP at purchasing power parity exchange rates, denoted as GDP (PPP). In addition to total population, the urban/rural split of population is relevant for MESSAGE-Access version of the model which distinguishes rural and urban population with different household income in developing country regions.

Recent examples of demographic and economic projections used in MESSAGE include the scenarios based on the Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) which provide population projections and GDP (PPP) projections at the country level (`SSP database <https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb/dsd?Action=htmlpage&page=welcome>`_).

Understanding how population and economic growth develops in the SSPs gives a first layer of understanding of the multiple mitigation and adaptation challenges. Population growth evolves in response to how the fertility, mortality, migration, and education of various social strata are assumed to change over time. In SSP2, global population steadily grows to 9.4 billion people around 2070, and slowly declines thereafter (KC and Lutz, 2015 :cite:`kc_human_2014`). Gross Domestic Product (GDP) follows regional historical trends (Dellink et al., 2015 :cite:`dellink_long-term_2015`). With global average income reaching about 60 (i.e., GDP/capita in thousand year-2005 USD/capita, purchasing-power-parity – PPP) by the end of the century, SSP2 sees an increase of global average income by a factor 6. The SSP2 GDP projection is thus situated in-between the estimates for SSP1 and SSP3, which reach 2100 global average income levels of 82 and 22 (thousand year-2005 USD/capita PPP), respectively. SSP2 depicts a future of global progress where developing countries achieve significant economic growth. Today, average per capita income in the global North is about five times higher than in the global South (see SI for regional definitions). In SSP2, developing countries reach today’s average income levels of the OECD by around 2060 to 2090, depending on the region. However, modest improvements of educational attainment levels result in declines in education-specific fertility rates, leading to incomplete economic convergence across different world regions. This is particularly an issue for Africa. Overall, both the population and GDP developments in SSP2 are designed to be situated in the middle of the road between SSP1 and SSP3, see KC and Lutz (2015) :cite:`kc_human_2014` and Dellink et al (2015) :cite:`dellink_long-term_2015` for details. (Fricko et al., 2016 :cite:`fricko_marker_2016`)
