.. _renewable:

Non-Biomass Renewable Resources
================================
:numref:`tab-depl` shows the assumed total potentials of renewable energy deployment (by resource type) in the MESSAGE model by 2050. :numref:`fig-rendep` overlays these estimates on a map of the 11 MESSAGE regions. In addition, the assumptions are compared with technical potential estimates from the Global Energy Assessment (Rogner et al., 2012 :cite:`rogner_chapter_2012`).  In this context, it is important to note that typical MESSAGE scenarios do not consider the full technical potential of renewable energy resources, but rather only a subset of those potentials, owing to additional constraints (e.g., sustainability criteria, technology diffusion and systems integration issues, and other economic considerations) that may not be fully captured within the model. These constraints may lead to a significant reduction of the technical potential.

.. _tab-depl:
.. list-table:: Assumed global non-biomass renewable energy deployment potentials in the MESSAGE model by 2050. Estimates from the Global Energy Assessment (Rogner et al., 2012 :cite:`rogner_chapter_2012`) also added for comparison.
   :widths: 13 36 46
   :header-rows: 2

   * - Source
     - MESSAGE
     - Rogner et al., 2012 :cite:`rogner_chapter_2012`
   * - 
     - Deployment Potential in 2050 [EJ/yr]
     - Technical Potential [EJ/yr]
   * - Hydro
     - 28
     - 50 - 60
   * - Wind
     - 170
     - 1250 - 2250
   * - Solar PV
     - 1650
     - 62,000 - 280,000
   * - CSP
     - 990
     - same as Solar PV above
   * - Geothermal
     - 23
     - 810 - 1400

*Notes: MESSAGE-GLOBIOM renewable energy potentials are based on *Pietzcker et al. (2014)* :cite:`pietzcker_solar_2014`, *Eurek et al. (in review)* :cite:`eurek_wind_2016`, *Christiansson (1995)* :cite:`christiansson_diffusion_1995`, *and Rogner et al (2012)* :cite:`rogner_chapter_2012`. *The potentials for non-combustible renewable energy sources are specified in terms of the electricity or heat that can be produced by specific technologies (i.e., from a secondary energy perspective). By contrast, the technical potentials from* :cite:`rogner_chapter_2012` *refer to the flows of energy that could become available as inputs for technology conversion. So for example, the technical potential for wind is given as the kinetic energy available for wind power generation, whereas the deployment potential would only be the electricity that could be generated by the wind turbines.*

Regional resource potentials for solar and wind are classified according to resource quality (annual capacity factor) based on Pietzcker et al. (2014, :cite:`pietzcker_solar_2014`) and 
Eurek et al. (in review, :cite:`eurek_wind_2016`). Regional resource potentials as implemented into MESSAGE-GLOBIOM are provided by region and capacity factor for solar PV, concentrating solar 
power (CSP), and onshore/offshore wind in Johnson et al. (in review, :cite:`johnson_vre_2016`). The physical potential of these sources is assumed to be the same across all SSPs. However, 
the part of the resource that is useable at economically competitive costs is assumed to differ widely (see Section :ref:`electricity`).
