Crop production
----
GLOBIOM explicitly covers production of each of the 18 world major crops representing more than 70% of the total harvested area and 85% of the vegetal calorie supply as reported by FAOSTAT. Each crop can be produced under different management systems depending on their relative profitability: subsistence, low input rainfed, high input rainfed, and high input irrigated, when water resources are available. For each of the four systems, crop yields are calculated at the Simulation Unit level on the basis of soil, slope, altitude and climate information, using the EPIC model (Williams and Singh 1995 :cite:`williams_computer_1995`). Within each management system, input structure is fixed following a Leontieff production function. But crop yields can change in reaction to external socio-economic drivers through switch to another management system or reallocation of the production to a more or less productive Supply Unit. Besides the endogennous mechanisms, an exogenous component representing longterm technological change is also considered.

The model directly represents production from three major land cover types: cropland, managed forest, and areas suitable for short rotation tree plantations.  Crop production accounts for more than 30 of the globally most important crops. The average yield level for each crop in each country is taken from FAOSTAT. Management related yield coefficients according to fertilizer and irrigation rates are explicitly simulated with EPIC for 17 crops (barley, dry beans, cassava, chickpea, corn, cotton, ground nuts, millet, potatoes, rapeseed, rice, soybeans, sorghum, sugarcane, sunflower, sweet potatoes, and wheat). These 17 crops together represent nearly 80 % of the 2007 harvested area as reported by FAO. Four management systems are considered (irrigated, high input - rainfed, low input - rainfed and subsistence management systems) corresponding to the International Food and Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) crop distribution data classification (You and Wood, 2006). Only two management systems are differentiated for the remaining crops (bananas, other dry beans, coconuts, coffee, lentils, mustard seed, olives, oil palm, plantains, peas, other pulses, sesame seed, sugar beet, and yams) – rainfed and irrigated. Rainfed and irrigated crop yield coefficients, and crop specific irrigation water requirements for crops not simulated with EPIC, and costs for four irrigation systems for all crops, are derived from a variety of sources as described in Sauer et al. (2008). The linkage between primary (crop) production and the land resources is represented in Equation (4) of the Appendix. The irrigation water balance is represented by accounting equation (9) and in the objective function, Equation (1). Thus, water scarcity is expressed through the parameterization of the water supply function.
(Insert Figure 1)
Crop supply can enter one of three processing/demand channels: consumption, livestock production and biofuel production (Figure 1). 
